Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Mark Sin. He works
as a senior research scientist at the TNO, a
leading research and technology organization in the Netherlands. And
today we're talking about his book, Ethics for people
who work in Tech. So, Doctor Sin, welcome to
the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Thanks for the invitation. It's a pleasure to be
here.
So tell us first, how do you approach ethics
in your book? I mean, I guess that even
the more basic question would be what is ethics
exactly? Yeah, so, uh, uh, I've worked for 25
years in research and development in ICT and what
we would currently call uh AI, uh, data-driven uh
innovation. And in that context, uh, uh, clients, partners,
co-workers ask me whether I can help them with
ethics, and that gives me a very practical perspective
on ethics. So for me, it means those people
involved in development and deployment of technologies, digital technologies,
how they take into account various ethical questions during
the process. So it's very much a process approach
to ethics, and you can contrast it if you
want, if you will, with the With more like,
uh, yes, a bit of caricature but with a
checkbox approach like did we do the privacy correctly?
Did we do the bias correctly? All those topics
appear also in this process approach of ethics, but
much more in the In the form of conversations
that people can have about these topics, deliberation, reflection,
and then, yeah, changing the products that they're working
on based on their findings from those dialogues and
reflections. So it's an ethics as a process.
Mhm. And in the book you mention or make
reference to a humanistic approach to the ethics of
technology. What is that?
Um, I think humanistic, you can say it means
putting people center stage that is also also being
in the in the tradition of human centered design.
So you're looking at the people, the ultimate beneficiaries
of these systems where they can flourish better. You
can also look at more level of society, whether
these. This can help to create uh more equity,
uh, uh, rule of law, fairness, uh, and also
that's maybe another meaning of humanistic. It means involving
the humanities much more than is often done in
technology development deployment, so, uh, philosophy and, and culture
and all those things.
Mhm. So, since we're going to talk a lot
about ethics in technology today, what is the distinction
between ethics in people and ethics in machines?
Yeah, that's, uh, I, I, I would say that
for me, ethics only happens within people and, and,
and between people. Uh, I don't think a computer
can have ethics. I know that people, uh, also
co-workers of mine, they make efforts to Uh, put
a bit of ethical reasoning into robots. So the
autonomous system will then have a rule like, uh,
uh, don't do this because it is dangerous, uh,
for people, so don't do it. So you can
say, well, it is programming a bit of basic
ethics into the robot. Yeah, in that sense, the
machine can be more or less, behave more or
less ethical, but I mean, the ethics happened in
the programmers who then wrote the program and then
the computer, the robot executes. So yeah, I would
say that ethics happens within people and, and in
between people, how we, how we engage with each
other, how we treat each other, of course, but
not so much in robots.
Mhm. So, since you've been working a lot on
the design and application of technology, are there similarities
between normative ethics and that that is the design
and application of technology?
Yeah, that's, that's a, that's an interesting question. In
my experience, they have lots, lots in common, so
normative ethics understood as that branch of ethics that
looks at the world and then says, hey, we
can do this better, more towards fairness, more towards
equity. It bears resemblance to the work in my
experience that engineers or designers can do. They also
look at the world and say, hey, there's something
not quite right here. Something can be improved, and
then they go about it. So in that sense,
they share a similar worldview looking at the world,
finding some elements of it problematic, and then making
efforts to to improve those situations. And of course,
the engineer will use technology and a normative ethicist
will use uh ethics, but they have, they have
lots of things in common in that sense, and
I I tried to include that, I, I, I
included that in the book in the introduction just
to, to get um engineers or developers or technologies
more broadly to get them more on board like
the work of ethics is not weird. You have
something in common already. You look at the world,
you want to improve things, which is good. So,
yeah, it's, it's making ethics more attractive, more, more,
more, more accessible to them.
But do you think that uh philoso moral philosophers
and ethicists would be open to approaching the ethics
of technology in this more sort of design and
application way or?
Oh yeah, I mean, uh, where I live in
the Netherlands, uh we have uh 4 universities of
technologies, and they, they all have great departments of
applied philosophy. Uh, APPLIED ethics, ethics of technology. So,
yeah, that, that combination is, uh, is almost normal,
you can say in, in the Netherlands. Mhm.
So tell us then about what in the book
you present as a three-step approach to facilitate ethical
reflection, inquiry, and deliberation. So what are the three
steps here?
Yeah, thanks. So that, that ties back to what
we said in the introduction, ethics as a process
to make it a bit more systematic. I'm introducing
this three-step progress process and I'm also emphasizing this
is an iterative process. So it's not like you
go 123, then you're good. You can do 12,
you can do 1 again, you can 2, you
can, so you, you can switch between, but it's
also useful to distinguish these phases, so. Uh, STEP
one, phase one is identifying those aspects, those topics,
those issues that are or may become problematic in
your project. So say you're working, a project team
is working on fraud detection algorithm, uh, well, Then
they can have a bit of a reflection of
brainstorming even what could go wrong? Well, bias, discrimination,
uh, the problem of transparency, uh, the problem of
false positives where you accuse somebody and then they
did not commit fraud. So there's discrepancy between the
algorithm and reality. So it's, it's, it's putting those
issues on the table to then go to step
2 that is have conversations about these issues. And
first, these conversations can be between uh the people
in the project team, but I'm also advocating that
um bringing in the clients, bringing partners, maybe bringing
in uh uh NGOs or people who know about
human rights or know about technology more. uh, AND
then, and then having More depth to the conversation.
So what is exactly the problem and what are
ways to, to, to address and solve these problems?
And then thirdly, and that is I think um
where the, where the normative ethics and the engineering
uh mindset, uh, yeah, go together best. It's essential
step 3 is do something with those findings. So
you have the issues on the table, you had
good conversations about it within the team and outside
the team, and then do something with it and
typically you can You, you need also, of course,
the commitment of project management or of the customer
or the commissioner of the project. Like, OK, OK,
I see this problem. I've heard the solution, let's
just implement this and then it's always a good
uh uh uh practice to, to make this into
an iterative process again, like after 3 months, we'll
meet again and then we'll evaluate how the, how
the improvements have worked out or have not worked
out, whether we need to adjust more. So, uh,
identify issues, have conversations about this and act. That's
really just the 3 steps.
Mhm. And uh what, what do you reply to
a question such as is technology neutral? Because this
is very highly debated, a very highly debated topic.
Uh, WHAT is your answer?
Yeah, I think I quote somebody, I forgot who
said it, but Technology is nor good nor bad,
nor is it neutral, so you can't say the
technology, this technology that is, is good, you can't
say it, you can say it's bad, you can
also say not say it's neutral. It is what
is it then? And I I think there's things
to be. There are various ways to approach this.
One could say, well, it's, it always depends upon
what people do with the technology. That's of course
the first way of understanding this. So this technology,
which is not good, not bad, nor neutral, but
it can be applied to good purposes or to
good ends or the other way around to evil
purposes. And to complicate matters further, often technologies have
a history. They have like a path dependency. Say
your, your, your gasoline car, uh, can you just
change it into an electric car? Well yes, you
can, but then, yeah, you can only do that
at the moment when, when your car is old
enough that you can afford to buy. NEW one
and then you must also take into account how
does it fit into the situation where there are
more gas stations and electricals, well, that's not the
case anymore because there are many electrical charging stations
nowadays. So this, this, this examples maybe not a
good one anymore, but you can't also not change
something because there's a past dependency, the choices that
you've made in the past. Sort of restrict, not
totally restrict, but they, yeah, they modify the choices
that you have. So a technology can therefore, if
it has already been used in certain applications, if
it is already embedded in certain practices, it tends
to do something more than it can do something
else. So at that moment, you can't say, well,
you can use it for, no, because you can
only really practically use it for that purpose for
which it, yeah, has been embedded uh in, in
all those practices and structures already. So, Yeah, I
think that like you're saying exactly the debate can
go on, but it's not neutral. That is, uh,
it's more complex.
Mhm. And how do you look at the relationship
between people and technology?
Um, THAT'S a difficult question. WHAT exactly?
Uh,
I'm, I'm.
I, I mean, I guess that we could put
it in two different ways. I mean, one of
them is since technology is created by people and
uh the the kinds of technologies that you're interested
in in terms of the ethics behind them, it,
it's people who need to program them in certain
ways to do this or do that or act
in the ways that we want them to. Uh,
I mean, I guess that, that, that would be
one way of putting it out, how do you
look at the relationship between people and technology in
that sense, so.
Yeah, yeah, I think I'll approach it this way.
This is taking into account like the last 1
or 2 years of Jet GBT and all the
AI hype and You've talked about artificial general intelligence
or artificial superintelligence, all these things. This may be
a context in which I can, can say something
that can be, can be useful, um. Here it
occurs to me and I'm, I'm not finished thinking
about this, but I often get the sense that
people confuse whether technology is a tool for people
to be used and then that that back to
your previous question, not neutral, but bad dependent, etc.
OR whether this technology, the AI or the ASI
or the AGI. Whether it, it can be or
can become an agent, uh, maybe not a moral
agent, but then an agent in the sense that
it acts more or less autonomously. And this really,
this really makes me think and like I said,
I'm not, I'm not. I'm not decided yet, but
I don't like the idea of a machine being
autonomous in the sense that as if it is
totally autonomous, there will always be a dependency like
you're saying, there's maintenance, there's programming, uh, it needs
to change its batteries and people need to do
that. So, but there, there will be moments or
periods of time where it acts autonomously and at
that moment, yeah, it, the machine, the robot can
behave almost. As if it is like a fellow
worker, a co-worker, maybe helper, assistant. These are, of
course, the words that people often use. And at
that moment, it's not really a tool anymore, not,
not, not a tool like a shovel that you
use to dig a hole. I mean, it's much,
it's much more than that. Um, SO relationship between
people and technology and what I, in this, I
hope that uh people will, will remain like in
charge, in control of the technology. And then also,
but that's entirely different question that we may or
may not go to like uh that who owns
the technology, uh, who controls it, is it, is
it big tech companies in the US? Is it
big tech companies in China? Is it the European
Union who can do something uh uh besides regulating,
can we make technology? That works for people. I
think that would be my uh my hope for
this relationship, that technology is there for people and
not the other way around.
Mhm. And I guess that is also at least
to some extent raises the question of if technology
behaves in ways that we find to be bad,
who is to be held responsible, right?
Yeah, and now you're, maybe you're using or moving
towards the, the vocabulary of uh of of law
of uh uh accountable, responsible, liable. Oh, that's a
whole different uh uh field of, uh, yeah. Uh,
LEGAL personality of those robots, yes or no, and
etc. I'm not an expert on that, so, uh,
we should park that topic.
OK. So, and in the book you also question
what is value at a certain point. So what
is value actually and what is technology specifically for?
What do we expect to get from technology?
Yeah, that's a nice question. So, while writing the
book, uh, it occurred to me, uh, that people
use value in various ways, and some people will
associate value with value creation and associate that with,
uh, market share and profits and, and, uh, like
the financial or economic side of it. Uh, THERE'S
something to be said for that, but you can
also understand the value in a sense of uh
what value does it have for society or for
the public goods. And so that's a whole a
whole different vocabulary where it's more about um. Uh,
JUST this, um. Democracy, even it can have or
undermine a democracy. Um, So I just think it
is important when people use words like value, let's
create value. Is it valuable or not, that they,
that they make explicit. So what are we talking
about? Are we talking about the financial side, economic
side of it? Are we talking about societal, the,
the, yeah, the public good, uh. Or the, or
the, or the well-being uh side of, of value.
And yeah, in that sense, both are, are, are
options. I just think it's, it needs to be
clear, uh. What people are discussing.
So it's not so much that one meaning of
value from the ones you mentioned there would be
better than the others in designing technology, but what's
more important is for people to agree on what
they want.
Yeah, that's maybe that's maybe a sort of Uh,
diplomatic answer and indeed I gave that answer, but
then if you, if, if, if we associated with,
with what I said earlier on the humanistic approach
and uh Uh, the serving people rather than the
other way around. I think I can say that
I, I would prioritize when you're talking to me.
I would, I would just find it more interesting,
uh, to, to understand value in the, in those,
in those second, uh, way like, uh, what does
it add to society, to democracy, to fairness, to
people's daily lives, their well-being, uh, and I know
that companies must make a dose of profit. There
must be a level of profitability. Uh, FOR it
to, uh, maintain its, uh, to, to continue to
maintain its services and products. But it does not
need to be, and this is maybe, uh, uh,
a political orientation of mine, uh, to that extent
where, uh, the big tech companies are just immensely
incomprehensibly, uh, I mean, how many, how many zeros
are there in those. Market cap valuations, there's like
a billion, trillion, I mean, there's these are. Yeah.
Hard to comprehend, so yeah, value for me means
more like uh the other way.
Mhm. So, in the book, you get into 3
topics that you say regularly featuring discussions about ethics
and technology or the ethics of technology. Let's go
through them all. So, the first one is the
trolley problem. So, would you like to introduce what
the trolley problem is and then why it's important
in these discussions?
Yeah, so it is a, it is from 1967.
Philippa Fo introduced the trolley problem. It was not
called the trolley problem. It later became known as
the trolley problem, but it goes like this. You're
standing near a railroad or a trolley or a
train, but that's, yeah, a trolley. It was, of
course, and It goes Uh, if it continues to
run, it will run off of 4 people. However,
there's also a switch in the track that you
can control, and if you apply that switch in
the track, it goes to an alternative track and
there it will kill one person. Mhm. So then
the question is, what would you do? Well, utilitarianism
or consequentialism would say, well, uh, one death is
less evil than 4 deaths, so must apply the
switch so that it only kills one. And then
they make it more complex. They say, well, there's
also the same situation, but there's not a switch,
but there's a bridge over the railroad, the track,
and there's a person who is like a heavy
body weight. So if you throw him down from
the bridge onto the track, it will also he,
the person will also stop the train. But that
of course, feels much more like murdering because you're
pushing, whereas the switching of the track, the first
scenario is, is like the train killing it and
you, uh, yeah, you're not really killing. So all
of that is psychology, it's philosophy. People know this
example very often when people talk about ethics and
machines, machine ethics and programming the ethics in the
machine, what we had at the beginning of our
conversation, people will say, Well, the trolley problem, and
I just got a little bit tired of that
problem because it, it assumes. That these questions can
be solved mathematically by saying 1 is less than
4, so that option is better, and it is,
it is not taking into account so much. Well,
it does take into account the psychology of it,
but there's also human rights, there's the ontology, there's
relational ethics, there's virtue ethics. So all of these
other types of ethics that will go into, I
guess. Later on, are out of the picture and
it's just simplifying all of it and even more,
if I look at that thought, I know it's
only a thought experiment, but if people treat it
not as a thought experiment, but as a realistic
situation that you can actually solve through computation and
calculation, just do the numbers. Then they're missing out
the picture and I have a background in industrial
design engineering, so I'm a practical person. I can
also think very much and easily in in solutions,
alternatives, creativity, all of that. So I would say,
well, can you, can you, can you also do
another analysis where you ask why did the brakes
malfunction and how is maintenance of the train organized?
And is it possible to do something else? Can
you just yell at the people on the track?
Uh, LIKE, hey, watch out, OK. There are there
are like 1000 other things that you can ask
on the problem definition site or that you can
explore on the solution finding site. Around that very
much too simplistic thought experiment and um yeah, I
just like to draw in all of that complexity
and say, well, the trolley problem is, is what
it is. It's a thought experiment, but you must
not use it as a realistic situation as if
the computer can solve it because reality is more
difficult and you must treat reality as difficult and
as complex as it is. And later on I
published something that maybe if you have shown notes
I can put it in where I combine this
more explicitly uh with systems thinking, the need to
understand a problem and a situation in its complexity
and then uh address it.
Mhm. But then, do you think that the really
problem with uh all of those caveats and perhaps
adding some of those other considerations that you mentioned
there is still a useful thought experiment in the
ethics of technology or
not? Yes, yes, it. IT is, it can be
used, so we'll later go on into like 4
ethical perspectives that I used that that that are
that often people in in ethics of technology use.
And one of them is this consequentialism where you
look at the positives and the negative consequences, you
compare them, you evaluate them, you choose. For that
perspective, it makes sense to understand the basics of
the trolley problem. Like sometimes you must choose between
something that's bad and something that's less bad. And
then if you take into account the agency that
you have, and if you take into account the
moral implications of that agency, like switching is different
from pushing the, the, the, the, the, the, it's
called the fat man, but I think it's ugly
title, the, the, the, the larger person from the
bridge. Um If you take that into account, I
mean, that, that, that's what the thought experiment can
help you with. Mhm. But not, but not more
than that.
OK, so the second topic that you mentioned in
the book has been regularly featured in these kinds
of discussions has to do with privacy. So, in
the realm of technology, what is privacy, what does
it entail, and what are perhaps some of the
biggest questions we have to tackle in this domain?
Yeah, so, uh, uh, another topic like you're saying
that often pops up in conversations about ethics and
technology, ethics and AI is privacy that has been
a topic since at least since Cambridge Analytica or
Facebook, uh, in, in an unfair way, barely legal
way, illegal way, uh, scraped all those data from
all those Facebook friends of friends and then used
it to, uh. Uh, WEAPONIZED the advertisements on Facebook
and then skewed the presidential elections in the US
at that time and the Brexit vote in the
UK around the same time. So all of that.
That has drawn enormous attention to privacy, but privacy
then means who owns the personal data and who
can just or can or cannot just scrape it
and use it for other purposes. So it's an
interesting topic, but then people, uh, sometimes if you
combine it with the context of a company who
uh develops or deploys technology, they will have a
legal officer and they will say privacy. And then
nothing else as if ethics is only privacy or
they'll say privacy compliance to the GDPR, the General
Data Protection Act of the, of the EU, uh.
As if, if you do the compliance of privacy
in terms of GDPR, then you're all good, whereas
privacy can be much more and even more so,
there's more topics than only privacy, as I mentioned
before, that's, that's really a key topic for me.
There's, there's, there's fairness, justice, and non-discrimination bias, all
of that. There's transparency, accountability, responsibility, all of that,
um. Uh, YEAH, privacy is only one thing and
then this narrow legal interpretation of privacy is yet
only one other thing. And if people want to
know more about this, Karissa Felli wrote a great
book on it. Privacy is Power. Well, it's already
in the title where she sets up this argument
that Who owns the data has power. And then
uh you can, uh, a big company can then
even transform its economic power into political power. We've
seen that recently in uh the activities of Elon
Musk in the presidential elections in the US where
like economic power sort of equals financial power, sort
of equals political power. And well, in, in Elon
Musk's case, that is not necessarily directly. Tied to
this privacy thing, but there are many other big
tech companies who do this privacy thing, all of
those businesses who, who thrive on ad revenues, of
course, like Google and Facebook or Me I should
say, of course.
Right. So the first topic has to do with
responsibility. So how does responsibility apply to the ethics
of technology.
That's really the third term that, that, that often
pops up even in, in, in, in, in, in
vocabulary like responsible innovation, uh, I call my area
of work responsible innovation and now people say, well,
can we do it responsibly? We can do this
responsible. RESPONSIBLE AI. So this word just pops up
and I was just looking for what does it
mean? And then I found in the literature of
ethics of technology, uh, it, it is often understood
as having two components like a knowledge component and
an action or control component. And what it means
is a person, imagine a developer and a team
working on this algorithm for fraud detection. He or
she. Can be responsible, but can only be responsible
to that level or to that extent or to
that quality that they know about the, the, the
knowledge component. So if they know about the current
situation, uh, how bad is the problem they're trying
to solve if they know about possible future situations
like how good is the algorithm? Can they really
improve the situation? So, yeah. Knowledge about it. If
they don't have the knowledge, they cannot be really
held responsible or and even more so not not
accountable for it. The other, but if they know,
then, then the responsibility sort of grows with it.
So the more knowledge you have, the more responsible
you are. The same for the, for the control
or the Uh, what's that the word control or
action? What you do it? I'm forgetting it. But
anyways, the amount or type of control that this
person has over the situation, if they can influence
the project a lot, maybe because they're a senior
developer, maybe they're the project manager, that means that
their responsibility also grows proportionally to that. Whereas if
they're only, and some people are only a smaller
player in the project team, they may be junior,
maybe the budget is not too big. So then,
And this may be harder to to to claim,
but still it sounds reasonable. That they are can
then be held less responsible for it. But now
that I'm saying it, it sounds like you can
buy your uh uh get out of jail card
very easily by just claiming, but I'm only a
small player. That's not, it's, it's really meant the
other way around, um. That uh you can take
you, there's an invitation to, to grab more control
of the situation that you would normally do, which
can require courage like raising your hand, asking a
question, because that, that goes hand in hand with
being responsible. And then in the book, I have
a drawing um that was uh I took it,
I think from um What's his name? You can
look it up in the book, of course. It's
not my metaphor, but I looked it up, uh,
climbers, rock climbers, they, they do it where they,
where they go up climbing, um. Uh, AND this
is also. They go from knowledge to control to
knowledge to control, so it's an invitation for people
to, to improve their responsibility first by raising their
knowledge about the situation, secondly, by uh trying to
get more agency, raising their hands, applying courage, uh,
and then, and then that will give them more
knowledge and that will give them more control. So
it's an invitation to To be more responsible in
that sense, it's certainly not what I just said
a couple of minutes ago, uh uh invitation to
claim the other way around. I know a little.
I'm just a small player. I can't be held
responsible. It's really the other way around. Mhm.
So, let's get then into the 4 different ethical
perspectives that you present in the book. I mean,
you talk about consequentialism, the ontology, relational ethics, and
virtue ethics. Uh, TELL us about each of them.
Let's start with consequentialism.
Yes, thanks. So, um, The first two are relatively
easily. I found out this 3rd and 4th 1
are more innovative for some people's expectations. The context
in which I use this is I have developed
a workshop format, rapid ethical deliberation. I call it
rapid because it just sounds like it doesn't take
ages. That's correct. You can do it in 2
hours. Of course, after 2 hours, you don't know
everything. You are invited to do it again and
again, it's an iterative process again. Um. And I
found that uh this, this first perspective, consequentialism is
relatively easy for people to, to get into. It's
the mindset of uh imagining the product that you're
working on, it being out in the world, it
having effects, it's having consequences, and then relatively simply
making a list of the good things that can
happen and the bad things that can happen. Uh,
IF you do this. Option A and for option
B, uh, which can also be not doing option
A, but let's say you have A and B
and therefore B also the making the, the pluses
and the minuses. And then out of it will
come uh often uh Yeah, a direction like B
is better because it has less or, or smaller
disadvantages or it has more or larger advantages. So
that appeals very much to anybody with a technology
background because it's, it's, it's, it's very comparable to
an engineering mindset where you have two options. You
just look at how good are they? Well, that
one is better, so we do it. So that
first one is uh consequential relatively straightforward. It has
its drawbacks. Uh, YOU can't compare apples and pears,
so, uh. Um, The plus here is for that
group, but the minus is for another group. Say
you have your self-driving car, it's a good thing
that you don't have to drive. It saves you
time and energy. The bad thing is that maybe
it will be a threat to pedestrians or people
on bikes if they, etc. So it puts the
pluses for the car owners. It puts the minuses
for the non-car owners. And consequentialism does not have
a really easy way to solve that. So that's,
that's where you go to the second perspective, the
ontology or duty ethics. It puts center stages, the
duties that people have and the rights that people
have, and typically schematically, the duties will lie with
the people involved in developing the deployment of technology,
the people who make the algorithm, the people who
deploy the algorithm or the electric car. And the
rights are often on the side of the people
uh implied suffering the consequences on the receiving end
of it, and they will have fundamental rights, human
rights, and that ethical perspective gives you a much
more principled outlook like, no, no, no, I don't
care so much about the pluses and minuses. There's
just this fundamental rights and you can't violate that
no matter how many pluses for that actor. In
financial sense that are there because in the vocabulary
of duty ethics you're not looking at plus minuses
there something else you're looking at people's rights and
they, and they will trump other things. So that's
um that's that perspective appeals very much to people
with a, with a legal background because of course
they, they know about compliance, which is an obligation
and know about human rights, which is the right
side. So those, those two perspectives are relatively easy
for people and then I go to the third
one, which is relational ethics. Um, AND in the
book, I explained that I use it as an
umbrella term, also ethics of care or care ethics
of feminist ethics. Uh, WHAT all of it comes
down together is often when I use it in
the workshop, I'm, I'm using like two questions. First
question is Often easy for people to get into
like, suppose this algorithm is implemented in the world
and it is being used in practice. So again,
this fraud detection algorithm. Um. How will it change
the way that people engage with each other, and
look into each other in the eyes, or cannot
look each other in the eyes? Will it, will
the, the, the tax inspector use the algorithm? Will
they, will they view the person as a number
or as a person with a, well, of, of,
of, of flesh and blood so to say. So
this, this, this looks at The way that technology
can be like very machine like or the other
way around if you take relational ethics more seriously,
where technology stays a little bit more to the
background and there's room enough for person to person
engagement and uh uh yeah, discretion, uh professional discretion
like I know that the algorithm says this, it
has a flag for your name. But I'm looking
at you and I'm using my human senses. So
this is again ties back to what we said
earlier like then the technology is only a tool.
Uh, FOR me, but I can, if I'm the
tax inspector using the fraud to text and algorithm,
I pay more attention to my, to my human
sensitivity and capabilities to do discretion. Uh, SO that,
that's one question in relation to ethics. Second one
is, uh, that's more abstract, but people also get
it easily, um. But it's abstract it goes up
a couple of levels, it looks at power. So
if the system is there, what happens to power?
Do the bureaucrats become more powerful or do the
citizens become more powerful? And in that sense, that's
why I mentioned it, it has uh uh connections
to feminist uh critique, uh, so it's feminist ethics
in that sense. And lastly for relational ethics, it
looks at um At care and justice, and justice
is the thing that's very much in this duty
ethics like. Uh, RIGHTS and human rights are very
much associated with justice, but there's also care and
then relational ethics will say care cannot do without
justice, just like justice cannot do without care. So
it's drawing attention to those dimensions. Lastly, yeah, virtual
ethics, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, I, I know, I
know, but, uh, I, I am treating this with
some depth because I consider it really the, the
heart of the book like what are these ethical
perspectives? How can you make them practical? So fourth
one is, um, virtual. Ethics. Uh, I'm very much
inspired, informed by Shannon Veler's work, uh, the book
of hers of 2016, I think it was technology
and the virtues. She makes a great argument, uh,
drawing from various virtue ethics, um, uh, traditions. Uh,
THE way that she looks at it and the
way also apply it is um. You can look
at a certain technology, say this mobile phone with
a social uh social uh. Uh, SOCIAL media app
on it, um, does it help or does it
hinder? People to cultivate certain values, sorry, um I'm
doing this, certain virtues, um. Uh, THE self-control, understood
as one of those, uh, classical card cardinal virtues,
uh, the virtue self-control, it means that I command
my own actions, uh, and I can stop when
I can, when I want to, I can start
when I want to. Well, Of course that virtue
of self-control is very easily undermined by social media
apps because they have like 500 psychologists on the
payroll making the app as addictive as possible because
of the ad revenue, they grab, they hold the
monetize your attention. Um, And then you can use
virtue ethics creatively and think of, OK, can you
think of a social media app that does not
erode your self-control, but that can help you to
cultivate self control? Yeah, that can be the social
media app where if you, if you start up
the app, it says how long do you want
to spend? I say, Well, 5 minutes is good.
I just want to be updated on LinkedIn. I
just want to be updated on my friends on
on somewhere else. And then after 5 minutes it
goes beep. This is a reminder to cultivate your
self-control. It's time to think of doing something else,
more useful, more creative, or whatever, and thanks. So
it can be done. If you have another business
model or a revenue model. So this is virtue
ethics in the sense that Shanveer is often applying
it and many others as well. And I'm adding
like uh 11 sort of layer to it, looking
at the virtues that the developers and the people
involved in developing deployment of technology will need. So
um if you want as a development team, your
algorithm. To not discriminate if you want it to
be fair with bias, then, well, very easily you
can you can imagine that those people will then
have to cultivate within themselves the virtue of, of
fairness or of justice, uh, being sensitive to things
going like in a weird direction, combined often with
courage, raising your hand, asking questions combined with wisdom,
which is also a cardinal virtue, um, seeing things
more clearly. Uh, USING discretion. So, uh, those are
the those are the four, ethical perspectives that, that,
that are often used and I make them very
practical in the book.
OK, so let me ask you a few follow-up
questions about these for ethical perspectives. So, um, do
you think that they are, I, I mean, what,
how should we approach them when it comes to
designing technology? Are they all viable? Should They should
the four of them always be considered? Do you
think that one of them is better than the
others? How basically should people who work in ethics
think about and apply these four different perspectives?
Yeah, it's an excellent question. Thanks. My invitation would
be to use all four of them and to
use them like in parallel, but not really in
parallel, but like serial like uh 20 minutes this,
20 minutes that 20, so you can do it
within 1 or 2 hours, 2 hours more likely.
Um, WHY am I inviting people to look at
all four perspectives? It's just because they, they, they
complement each other so beautifully. It would be silly
not to look at the pluses and minuses. Yeah,
but it would also be silly to not look
at human rights. Yeah, but it would also be
silly not to look at power and how it
changed relationships. Yeah. So all of them are viable.
Uh, HAVING said that, um, uh, in my experience,
it works best if you also isolate them because
it's like the language, uh, uh, you're Portuguese speaking,
uh, I'm Dutch speaking, we're now talking English, so
we're finding ways to communicate and if in the
middle of the sentence I will change the language,
it will be harder for you to follow. So
in the midst of a discussion of pluses and
minuses, it's good to, to remain in that mindset,
the pluses and minuses mindset of consequentialism and then
people can say human rights something and then I
found out that's a good topic. We'll park it
for later for the next uh part of the
agenda and then we do fully all of the
obligations, the law, uh, compliance, human rights, all of
that. And then somebody says plus the m, yeah,
it's a good idea, but we, we don't let,
we give the full floor to that perspective for
as long as we want, let's say 20 minutes,
so we can really dive into that perspective, uh,
and this is again my, yeah. My recommendation to
make all of these conversations more explicit. So what
are we talking about? Is it pluses and minuses?
Are you now saying it's good for profit? I
mean, it's, it's, it's, yeah, it's perfectly practical if
somebody says, well, this option is better because it
gives us profitability economic, you can do that. But
if somebody, somebody says human rights, that's also a
great topic, but a different topic with a different
perspective. So, uh, making things explicit and also making,
making, making careful in the sense that Don't confuse
those perspectives, uh, because then it will be a
messy dialogue. Uh, HAVING said that, the first two
So consequentialism and duty ethics are, as I, as
I suggested before, relatively easy for people to get
into. That's also why I start uh workshops with
those and they were good, then we're halfway, and
then I make somewhat more complex ones like the
relational ethics. By the way, I don't say feminist,
I don't say care, I just pose the questions
like how would it change interactions between people, what
does it do to power? So I, they don't
need the theoretical backgrounds. Uh, SO you were saying,
are they all needed? Yes, they're all needed. Do
I have a preference? Not really. However, given the
situation that people are already very often doing consequentialism
duty ethics. Uh, MY favorite ones are the relational
ethics and the virtue ethics because they're often relatively
new to people and it adds something to their,
to their vocabulary and to their sensitivity. So next
workshop they can say, Yeah, but we can also
imagine it's having influence on people's virtues and they're
flourishing and then I think, well, that's great. You
would not have been able to say that if
we had not also spent some time on that
ethical perspective.
Right. But uh for example, if we're dealing with
different types of technologies that someone is designing, would,
uh, different ethical perspectives apply to different kinds of
technologies better than the others or, for example, For
example, if we're dealing with a specific ethical problem
that we are trying to solve in designing a
specific kind of technology, is it that one of
them is better than the others, or should we
all, uh, should we always try to apply all
four of them?
Yeah, I think, I think it's a, it's a,
it's a relevant question. People have asked me also,
do we need all 4? Yeah, we need all
4, but then in practice, it often happens that
one or two of them get most of the
attention, uh, often because that's just the application or
the system or the product or service they're working
on. It just raises more questions in that perspective.
So, uh, an, an app that facilitates human to
human communication, you will spend a bit more on
the relational ethics side of it. An app that
uh or a system that people use all the
time that really ties into their habits. Habits is
also a vocabulary of virtue ethics, uh, to develop
virtuous habits is like the whole thing of virtue
ethics. So for those systems where they become part
of a behavior of a habit, their virtue ethics
is a, is a, is a, is a good
place to spend some extra time, like how does
it change people's, uh, attitudes, behaviors, habits, virtues. Uh,
SO yeah, just, just do all four of them
and it's also great if uh two of them
get some more attention because, well, that's just like
you're saying, uh, projects are different and will require
different emphasis.
Mhm. So to get a little bit more practical
now that we're we're reaching the end of our
conversation, if someone is thinking about developing a new
kind of technology where ethical considerations might apply, how
do you think they should proceed? I mean, would
there be a set of principles or guidelines for
them to follow?
If they, if they just want to get started,
uh, uh, I've made a canvas, so that's a
big piece of paper with a handful of questions
for each of those four perspectives written on them,
and I've used it often in workshops. It starts
with, um, in the middle of the, the drawing
of the canvas is like a blank circle, and
I think it's good to Because you're saying, where
do you start? I always advise people to start
with the thing they're working on to put that
center stage. Uh, SO, OK, what is that the
algorithm that you're working on? Tell me in somewhat
practical detail with some specificity, who uses it, how
do they use it, what then happens, who then
gets the consequences from what happens? Just tell me,
what does it do? And that's the starting point
for the discussion and uh uh technology-oriented people love
that, I found because it makes it practical because
the 1st 5 or 10 minutes of each workshop
is just filled with their project, but it is
their project, also the workshop is their project, but
it's just a good starting point and what it
helps people to do, uh, critically is that it
makes all the conversations after that much more practical.
Because you can't say, OK, suppose that we don't
do it, uh, the first step, but we just
say, well, there's the project, fraud detection something. Well,
it doesn't matter the details, we'll just talk about
ethics. Yeah, then people will stare at each other
like, yeah, something fairness, something biased, but then, then
the then the conversation just drops on the, on
the ground, it falls flat. Whereas if they had
spent 5 or 10 minutes at the start, OK,
this is data that go into it. These are
the databases that we're using. So these are the
biases that are in there. This is how the
algorithm works. These are the false positives, these are
the false negatives. This is what then happens. This
is the process organized around it? Is there, is
there slack? Is there maneuver room for the inspector
person to use their own discretion against the algorithm?
Can they do pushback? Is there a feedback mechanism
in uh uh envisioned? Is it being evaluated, so
all of it. Tell me all the details. OK.
Now we're good. Now we can start. And then,
And then the, all the dialogues after that are
much more informed and much more, much more detailed.
So your question, where do you start? Well, with
the project and its details and specificity, and then
you let loose the four perspectives.
Mhm. And then, uh, finally, I wanted to ask
you about, uh, 3 different methods that you present
toward the end of your book. One is human-centered
design, the second one value sensitive design, and the
third one, responsible innovation. So, uh, tell us a
little bit about them. What are these 3 different
methods, how they apply and things like that?
Yeah, yeah, great. Yeah, that's indeed the last bit
of the book. What I do there is I
look at three, traditions, if you like, that are
already there. And so my argument is then don't
waste your time on setting up something, something ethical.
Just look at what is already there. Maybe people
are doing human centered design already or value center
design already or responsible innovation already. And I'll go
into all of three of them, but the, the
mechanism that I want to uh recommend is just
look at the practices that are already there and
then add ethics just to it. Uh, BECAUSE otherwise
it, it puts much too much pressure on the,
on, on, on having to organize an entirely new
and different pro, and no, don't do that. Just
take what's there. So human centered design is broadly
the approach where the developers uh talk to potential
future end users, maybe in focus groups, maybe usability
testing, maybe user experience testing, uh, all of that,
uh. And it's very, uh, not, not fair, but
it's relatively easy to just add to that the
four types of questions from the four ethical perspectives
in the focus group in the usability testing, uh,
and then, uh, more practically. Uh, HUMAN centered design,
if you look at its, uh, there's an ISO
norm for it. Uh, IT is already iterative, so
that's good. And it is already participative in the
sense that you invite the potential future end users
to collaborate, but also you're asking experts, uh, and
then you would now add also maybe a human
rights expert or an NGO person to talk about
human rights just to the team. So it's acknowledging
human centered design is already halfway great. You're already
putting people and their experiences center stage. It is
already iterative, it is already participatory. So just add
ethics to it and you're good. Another approach that
I mentioned is value sensit design. Uh, IT came,
uh, also from industry. Uh, It recommends. Identifying those
values that are are potentially at stake in this
project and then inviting stakeholders around the table to
talk about these values and then having a decision
mechanism to yeah, to make choices like, OK, so
this is the value that we will prioritize and
we want to prioritize and then secondly, how do
we do that? How do we develop the technology
or modify the technology or the airport system in
such ways that indeed that That value that we
want to improve is improved. Uh, SO that's a
great way already, uh, to do ethics, and many
people, uh, especially, I think in the Netherlands, it's
like a very common approach in the four, universities
of technology that I mentioned. So that's Delft aint
of tre and Wageningen, those were Dutch words, uh,
but people maybe know one of them, uh, um.
They do often something very akin to value sense
of design. They can also do it designed for
values, which is acknowledging that during the design process,
you can do it such and such that the
values are uh uh promoted rather than corroded. Now
between parenthesis, I can add a bit of critique
on value sensitive design because uh sometimes I've seen
that it is difficult for people to, to, to
become practical with the value. Say we're, we're having
a discussion. Well, justice, justice is good, right? Fairness
is good, right? Yeah, but We don't nobody will
very few people will disagree on that. So how
do you then decide uh what it means very
practically in the project. So, um I found that
talking about virtues. Can sometimes help people uh to
become more, to have a more practical approach to
the system. So fraud detection thing again or the
social media up again, uh, the values are like,
yeah, we, we agree on them relatively easily, but
then what happens practically in terms of what people's
habits and, and, and, and traits and, and, and
virtues, how do they, how do they change and
that's Yeah, I'm not the only one. There are
a couple of other authors also they're saying like
something like, like virtue centered design or people are
saying capability, sensitive design. I will not go into
that, but the capability approach is akin to virtue
ethics. So uh it, it's a way of making
the values which have a risk of remaining a
bit abstract of making them more practical. And thirdly,
responsible innovation. I'm not sure whether people in industry
will recognize all of the vocabulary that goes together
with responsible innovation. Maybe responsible innovation is more like
an academic term, but some of the elements I
think will be, will be uh uh uh yeah,
very, uh. Uh, PEOPLE will be familiar with them
in industry. So there are 4 of them often,
um, anticipation, responsiveness, inclusion, and reflexivity, and I can
say just a little bit about them, but, uh,
the thing is that If in industry. People are
imagining future consequences or outcomes. They're doing anticipation and
then if they want to act upon it, they're
doing responsiveness. So, uh. It's really a recommendation to,
to, to bake some bit more of that into
your projects. Just think about what could go wrong,
but also the other way around, what could, what
could go enormously successful, which, which can cause its
own problems, uh, weirdly enough, um. Third one of
those is diversity and inclusion and I like that
uh that uh dimension a lot. Uh, I'm associating
it also with, uh with the participatory aspect of
it, uh, what I said before. So rather than
having only the technology-oriented project team members discussed those
topics, uh, doing the ethics, uh, practical workshops, what
I said, it's, it's, it's just more advantage. To
advantageous to, to, to invite other people with other
backgrounds. Notoriously, uh, many of the products that come
out of Silicon Valley look like they've been designed
by White rich, 30-ish people and maybe they are,
I think they are. Had they included in their
project teams, I don't know, older people, people of
color, people who are not affluent, uh, other concerns
would have been on the table, uh potentially and
would have been taken into account. So this is
just a big recommendation to uh if possible, if
relevant, uh make the project team and interactions that
you have just a bit more or a lot
more uh diverse and inclusive of, yeah, those concerns
and those perspectives that otherwise remain out of sight.
Uh, 4th 1 of responsible innovation is reflexivity, um.
Yeah. In short, it just means be aware of
what you're doing. Mhm. Don't think that uh other
people will solve the problem that you're looking at
because no, you're the person who's looking at it,
so beware of that and just try to improve
it.
Great. So, the book is again, ethics for people
who work in tech. I'm leaving a link to
it in the description of the interview. And Doctor
Stein, just before we go apart from the book,
are there any places on the internet you would
like to mention where people can find you and
your work?
Yeah, thanks for the question. Yeah, uh, so the
book has a website associated to it. It's simply
called Ethics for people who work in tech.com. And
the great thing of that website is you can
find uh lots of resources there. So the, the
good thing is by the book, but the less
good thing, but still great if, if you just
go there and look at shorter articles, essays, uh,
I have a sort of annotated, uh. Uh, ONLINE
resources for each chapter. So, uh, on the go,
you can just have a listen to a podcast
here or there or a short YouTube, uh, a
video to just also explain the things that are
in the book. It's just to make it more
accessible to people. Oh, and Mark Steyn, Mark M
A R C Steyn at sorry dot NL. That's
the Netherlands. That's my personal uh where all my
academic stuff is.
OK, great. So thank you so much again for
coming on the show. It's been a real pleasure
to talk with you.
Thanks a lot for the invitation. I enjoyed a
lot. Thanks, Ricardo.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullern, Fredrik Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alexandam Castle, Matthew Whitting Berarna Wolf, Tim Hollis, Erika
Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the Matter
Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Neevs called Holbrookfield governor Michael
Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnseroro and Hal Herzognun
Macha Joan Labrant John Jasent and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus Fran David Sloan
Wilson, Asila dearraujurumen ro Diego Londono Correa. Yannick Punterrumani
Charlotte blinikolbar Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine, Gary Galman
Samovallidrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall Edin
Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti Gabrielon Corteseus Slelitsky, Scott
Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John Wieman. Daniel Friedman,
William Buckner, Paul Georgianeau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris
Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the Augusta, Anton Eriksson,
Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Corale Chevalier, bungalow
atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry Michael
Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grayigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake Zu,
Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris
Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon,
Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis,
Kate van Goller, Alexander Hubbert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud
Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursulauddinov, Gregory Hastings, David
Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levine, and Jos Net. A
special thanks to my producers. These are Webb, Jim,
Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedict
Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo
Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my
executive producers, Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and
Rosie. Thank you for all.